add tips for all cases in {tls, mtls, trusted CAs, unstrusted CAs} (#5315)
solo-io/gloo: docs/content/guides/security/tls/client_tls.md

description: Set up Gloo Edge to route to TLS-encrypted services
---

> We can configure Gloo Edge to use TLS or mTLS when connecting to upstream services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can configure Gloo Edge to use TLS or mTLS when connecting to upstream services.
```

Great! Now we've seen how Gloo Edge can be configured to encrypt traffic sent to a backend service which is configured to serve TLS.

### Trusted mode

> If you want Envoy to verify the upstream server certificate, there are 2 ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want Envoy to verify the upstream server certificate, there are two ways:
```

- using a standard **TLS** secret, as shown above, with an additional field named `ca.crt`. Only this `ca.crt` field will be transmitted from Gloo to Envoy, as part of trusted CAs.

> - using an Opaque secret created via:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- using an Opaque secret created with the following command:
```

```bash
glooctl create secret tls --rootca=...
```

## Two-way TLS (mTLS)

> During the TLS handshake, the (upstream) server will ask Envoy to present a client certificate.

Reviewer: Maybe no parens, since the other instances of upstream server don't have this
```suggestion
During the TLS handshake, the upstream server will ask Envoy to present a client certificate.
```

### Client certificate without a trust store

There are two ways:
- using a standard **TLS** secret with the `tls.key` and `tls.crt` fields

> - using an Opaque secret created as shown below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- using an Opaque secret created with the following command:
```

```bash
glooctl create secret tls --privatekey ... --certchain ...
```

### Client certificate with a trust store

There are two ways:
- using a standard **TLS** secret with the `tls.key`, `tls.crt` and also `ca.crt` fields

> - using an Opaque secret created via 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- using an Opaque secret created with the following command: 
```

```bash
glooctl create secret tls --rootca=...
```

{{% notice warning %}}

> You cannot use a **generic** secret with these 3 keys (`tls.crt`, `tls.key`, `ca.crt`). It won't be recognized by Gloo.

Reviewer: Can we tell them what type of secret they should use then, if not generic? Not sure, but maybe:
```suggestion
Do not use a **generic** secret with these three keys (`tls.crt`, `tls.key`, `ca.crt`) because Gloo does not recognize generic secrets in this case. Instead, you must create a **tls** secret from an existing `.PEM` encoded public and private key pair.
```

{{% /notice %}}

Gloo Edge supports client-side TLS where the proxy (Envoy) presents a certificate to upstream servers when initiating a connection on behalf of a downstream client, encrypting all traffic between the proxy and the upstream.

## Troubleshooting

### Secret not found

> It can happen that a `sslConfig` is not processed and sent to Envoy (the data plane) by Gloo (the control plane).
> 
> You can check the logs of the Gloo pod to ensure there is no sync issue:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes, the Gloo control plane might not process and send the `sslConfig` to the Envoy data plane. To check if a sync issue happened, review the Gloo pod logs.
```

```bash
kubectl -n gloo-system logs -l gloo=gloo
```

Example of an issue:
```json
{"level":"warn","ts":1631524528.8111176,"logger":"gloo-ee.v1.event_loop.setup.v1.event_loop.envoyTranslatorSyncer","caller":"syncer/envoy_translator_syncer.go:140","msg":"proxy gloo-system.gateway-proxy was rejected due to invalid config: 2 errors occurred:\n\t* invalid resource gloo-system.default-server-mtls\n\t* SSL secret not found: list did not find secret default.client-mtls\n\n\nAttempting to update only EDS information","version":"1.8.7"}
```

> The best way to see which `sslConfig` is actually used by Envoy is to run an [Envoy config dump]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/debugging_gloo/#dumping-envoy-configuration" >}})

Reviewer: What should they look for, such as any particular field names?
```suggestion
To see which `sslConfig` is actually used by Envoy, run an [Envoy config dump]({{< versioned_link_path fromRoot="/operations/debugging_gloo/#dumping-envoy-configuration" >}}).
```
